## <span class="chapnum">1.1</span> The Elements of Programming

A powerful programming language is more than just a means for instructing a
computer to perform tasks.  The language also serves as a framework within
which we organize our ideas about processes.  Thus, when we describe a
language, we should pay particular attention to the means that the language
provides for combining simple ideas to form more complex ideas.  Every powerful
language has three mechanisms for accomplishing this:


- **primitive expressions**,
which represent the simplest entities the language is concerned with,

- **means of combination**,
by which compound elements are built from simpler ones, and

- **means of abstraction**,
by which compound elements can be named and manipulated as units.



In programming, we deal with two kinds of elements: procedures and data. (Later
we will discover that they are really not so distinct.)  Informally, data is
“stuff” that we want to manipulate, and procedures are descriptions of the
rules for manipulating the data.  Thus, any powerful programming language
should be able to describe primitive data and primitive procedures and should
have methods for combining and abstracting procedures and data.

In this chapter we will deal only with simple numerical data so that we can
focus on the rules for building procedures.[^4] In later chapters we will see that these
same rules allow us to build procedures to manipulate compound data as well.

---

[^4]: The characterization ofnumbers as “simple data” is a barefaced bluff.  In fact, the treatment ofnumbers is one of the trickiest and most confusing aspects of any programminglanguage.  Some typical issues involved are these: Some computer systemsdistinguish _integers_, such as 2, from _real numbers_, such as2.71.  Is the real number 2.00 different from the integer 2?  Are thearithmetic operations used for integers the same as the operations used forreal numbers?  Does 6 divided by 2 produce 3, or 3.0?  How large a number canwe represent?  How many decimal places of accuracy can we represent?  Is therange of integers the same as the range of real numbers?  Above and beyondthese questions, of course, lies a collection of issues concerning roundoff andtruncation errors---the entire science of numerical analysis.  Since our focusin this book is on large-scale program design rather than on numericaltechniques, we are going to ignore these problems.  The numerical examples inthis chapter will exhibit the usual roundoff behavior that one observes whenusing arithmetic operations that preserve a limited number of decimal places ofaccuracy in noninteger operations.